# View

- View function
- Decorators
- Shortcuts


### Overview

A *view* is simply a Python function that **takes a Web request** (`HttpRequest` object) and **returns a Web response** (`HttpResponse` object). This response can be the HTML contents of a Web page, or a redirect, or a 404 error (or an XML document, or an image . . . or anything really).
The view itself contains whatever arbitrary logic is necessary to return that response. 

The convention is to put views in a file called `views.py`, placed in your project or application directory.

## View Function

- The name of the view function doesn’t matter.
- A view function takes an HttpRequest object as its first parameter (which is typically named request).

For example, this view returns the current date and time, as an HTML document:

```
from django.http import HttpResponse
import datetime

def current_datetime(request):
    now = datetime.datetime.now()
    html = "<html><body>It is now %s.</body></html>" % now
    return HttpResponse(html)
```

See the [documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/request-response/) for HttpRequest and HttpResponse objects including :

- HttpRequest objects
- QueryDict objects
- HttpResponse objects
- HttpResponse subclasses (HttpResponseRedirect, HttpResponseForbidden, HttpResponseNotFound, etc.)
- JsonResponse objects
- StreamingHttpResponse objects
- FileResponse objects

## Shortcuts


[https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/topics/http/shortcuts/](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/topics/http/shortcuts/)

###render()

Use `render(request, template_name, [context=None])` to _render a template with a context dictionary_ AND _return an HttpResponse object_ with that rendered text.

- **request**: The request object used to generate this response.
- **template_name**: The full name of a template to use or sequence of template names.
- **context**: A dictionary of values to add to the template context.

```
from django.shortcuts import render

def my_view(request):
    # View code here...
    return render(request, 'myapp/index.html', {"foo": "bar"})
```
equivalent to:

```
from django.http import HttpResponse
from django.template import RequestContext, loader

def my_view(request):
    # View code here...
    t = loader.get_template('myapp/index.html')
    c = RequestContext(request, {'foo': 'bar'})
    return HttpResponse(t.render(c))
```

### render\_to\_response()

Use `render_to_response(template_name, [context=None])` to _render a template with a context dictionary_ AND _return an HttpResponse object_ with that rendered text.

NB: `render_to_response()` is equivalent to `render()` without the use of a RequestContext.

```
from django.shortcuts import render_to_response

def my_view(request):
    # View code here...
    return render_to_response('myapp/index.html', {"foo": "bar"})
```

### redirect()

Use `redirect(to, permanent=False, *args, **kwargs)` to _return an HttpResponseRedirect to the appropriate URL_ for the arguments passed.

### get\_object\_or\_404()

Use `get_object_or_404(klass, *args, **kwargs)` to _call `get()` on a given model manager_, but it raises Http404 instead of the model’s DoesNotExist exception.

```
from django.shortcuts import get_object_or_404

def my_view(request):
    my_object = get_object_or_404(MyModel, pk=1)
```    

### get\_list\_or\_404()

Use `get_list_or_404(klass, *args, **kwargs)` to _return the result of `filter()` on a given model manager cast to a list_, raising Http404 if the resulting list is empty.

```
from django.shortcuts import get_list_or_404

def my_view(request):
    my_objects = get_list_or_404(MyModel, published=True)
```


## Decorators

Apply **decorators** on views to _support various HTTP features_.

### Allowed HTTP Methods

Use the following decorators in `django.views.decorators.http`  
to _restrict access to views based on the request method_.

- `@require_GET()` : require that a view only accepts the GET method.
- `@require_POST()` : require that a view only accepts the POST method.
- `@require_safe()` : require that a view only accepts the GET and HEAD methods.
- `@require_http_methods(request_method_list)` : require that a view only accepts particular request methods. 

```
from django.views.decorators.http import require_http_methods

@require_http_methods(["GET", "POST"])
def my_view(request):
    # instructions
    pass
```

### Conditional View Processing (Caching)

Use the following decorators in `django.views.decorators.http`  
to _generate ETag and Last-Modified headers_.

- `@condition(etag_func=None, last_modified_func=None)`
- `@etag(etag_func)`
- `@last_modified(last_modified_func)`

HTTP clients can send a number of headers to tell the server about copies of a resource that they have already seen. This is commonly used when retrieving a Web page (using an HTTP GET request) to **avoid sending all the data for something the client has already retrieved**. However, the same headers can be used for all HTTP methods (POST, PUT, DELETE, etc). See [conditional view processing](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/topics/conditional-view-processing/).

### GZip Compression

Use the decorators in `django.views.decorators.gzip` to _control content compression_ on a per-view basis.

- `@gzip_page()` : compresses content if the browser allows gzip compression

### Vary Headers

Use the decorators in `django.views.decorators.vary` to _control caching_ based on specific request headers. See [vary headers](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/topics/cache/#using-vary-headers).

- `@vary_on_cookie(func)`
- `@vary_on_headers(*headers)`



