# Class-Based Views

Class-based views provide an alternative way to implement views as Python objects instead of functions. 
See the [reference documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/class-based-views/flattened-index/) for class-based views.

They have certain differences and advantages when compared to function-based views:

* Organization of code related to specific HTTP methods (GET, POST, etc) can be addressed by separate methods instead of conditional branching.
* Object oriented techniques such as mixins (multiple inheritance) can be used to factor code into reusable components.

The simplest way reference views is to create them directly in your URLconf.

1. Import the class of the view : `from myapp.views import MyView `
2. In the url(), call the `.as_view()` method on the class of the view : `MyView.as_view()`

```
from myapp.views import MyView

urlpattern = [
	url(r'^$', MyView.as_view())
]
```

## Base Views

Use the following three classes from `django.views.generic.base` as *parent classes* to _provide much of the functionality needed to create Django views_. See [documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/class-based-views/base/).

- `View` class is the base class for all class-based views.
- `RedirectView` class redirects to a given URL.
- `TemplateView` class renders a given template.

##### Example URLconf

```
from django.conf.urls import url

from myapp.views import MyView

urlpatterns = [
    url(r'^mine/$', MyView.as_view(), name='my-view'),
]
```

##### Example views.py

```
from django.http import HttpResponse
from django.views.generic import View

class MyView(View):

    def get(self, request, *args, **kwargs):
        return HttpResponse('Hello, World!')
```

## Generic Views

Django’s generic views are built off of base views, and were developed as a **shortcut for common usage patterns** such as displaying the details of an object. They take certain common idioms and patterns found in view development and abstract them so that you can quickly write common views of data without having to repeat yourself.

### Generic Display Views

Use the following generic class-based views to _display data_. ([See docs](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/class-based-views/generic-display/))

- `ListView` in `django.views.generic.list` to display a **list of objects**.
- `DetailView` in `django.views.generic.detail` to display a **single object**.

### Generic Editing Views

Use the following generic class-based views in `django.views.generic.edit` to _provide a foundation for editing content_. ([See docs](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/class-based-views/generic-editing/))

- `FormView` to display a **form**.
- `CreateView` to display a **form for creating an object**.
- `UpdateView` to display a **form for editing an existing object**.
- `DeleteView` to display a **confirmation page and delete an existing object**.

### Generic Date Views

Use the following generic class-based views in `django.views.generic.dates` to _display drilldown pages for date-based data_.([See docs](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/class-based-views/generic-date-based/))

- `DateDetailView` to display **an individual object**.
- `ArchiveIndexView` to display the **“latest” objects, by date**.
- `YearArchiveView` to display **all available months in a given year**.
- `MonthArchiveView` to display **all objects in a given month**.
- `WeekArchiveView` to display **all objects in a given week**.
- `DayArchiveView` to display **all objects in a given day.**.
- `TodayArchiveView` to display **all objects for today.**.


## Mixins

Use mixins to _add extra behaviour into classes_. They are just classes.

Mixins are nice for providing modularity. They should have one specific goal and they should not themselves be extended or instantiated. There are two main situations where mixins are used:

1. Use mixins to provide a lot of optional features for a class.
1. Use mixins to use one particular feature in a lot of different classes.

See [mixins usage example](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/topics/class-based-views/mixins/), [stackoverflow thread](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/533631/what-is-a-mixin-and-why-are-they-useful) and the [full documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/class-based-views/mixins/)


### Simple mixins

- `ContextMixin` to return **a dictionary representing the template context**.
- `TemplateResponseMixin` to **construct a TemplateResponse**, given suitable context.

### Single object mixins

- `SingleObjectMixin` to **look up an object associated with the current HTTP request**.
- `SingleObjectTemplateResponseMixin` to **perform template-based response rendering** for views that operate **upon a single object instance**.

### Multiple object mixins

- `MultipleObjectMixin` to **display a list of objects**.
- `MultipleObjectTemplateResponseMixin` to **perform template-based response rendering** for views that operate **upon a list of object instances**.


### Editing mixins

- `FormMixin` to **provide facilities for creating and displaying forms**.
- `ModelFormMixin` to **provide a form mixin that works on ModelForms**, rather than a standalone form.
- `ProcessFormView` to **provide basic HTTP GET and POST workflow**.
- `DeletionMixin` to **enable handling of the DELETE http action**.

### Date-based mixins

- `DateMixin` to **provide common behavior for all date-based views**.
- `YearMixin` to **retrieve and provide parsing information for a year** component of a date.
- `MonthMixin` to **retrieve and provide parsing information for a month** component of a date.
- `DayMixin` to **retrieve and provide parsing information for a day** component of a date.
- `WeekMixin` to **retrieve and provide parsing information for a week** component of a date.

    