# Data Models

- Introduction
- Quick Example
- Fields
	- Field types
	- Field options
- Relationships
	- One-To-Many
	- Many-To-Many
	- One-To-One
- Manager

## Introduction
A **Django Model** is the source of data that _describes your data entities_. It contains the essential **fields** and **behaviors** of the data you’re storing. Generally, each model maps to a single database table.  
With all of this, Django gives you an automatically-generated database-access API (ORM).

#### The basics:

- All model are Python class that subclasses django.db.models.Model
- Each model represents a single database table
- Each attribute of the model represents a database field

#### The construction:

1. Define attributes (fields, relationships, manager)
2. Define methods (instance methods, custom methods)

#### The rendering:

1. Get hold of the object in the view (e.g. fetch it from the database)
2. Pass it to the template context
3. Expand it to HTML markup using template variables

## Quick Example
This example model defines a `Person`:

```
from django.db import models

class Person(models.Model):
	first_name = models.CharField(max_length=30)
	last_name = models.CharField(max_length=30)
```
`first_name` and `last_name` are fields of the model. Each field is specified as a class attribute, and each attribute maps to a database column.  

The above Person model would create a database table like this:

```
CREATE TABLE myapp_person (
	"id" serial NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
	"first_name" varchar(30) NOT NULL,
	"last_name" varchar(30) NOT NULL
);
```

- The name of the table, `myapp_person`, is automatically derived from some model metadata but can be overridden.
- An `id` field is added automatically, but this behavior can be overridden.

## Fields

The most important part of a model is the list of database fields it defines. 
Be careful not to choose field names that conflict with the models API like clean, save, or delete.

Example:

```
from django.db import models

class Musician(models.Model):
	first_name = models.CharField(max_length=50)
	last_name = models.CharField(max_length=50)
	instrument = models.CharField(max_length=100)
	
class Album(models.Model):
	artist = models.ForeignKey(Musician)
	name = models.CharField(max_length=100)
	release_date = models.DateField()
	num_stars = models.IntegerField()
```

By default, Django gives each model the following auto-incrementing primary key field:

```
class MyModel(models.Model):
	id = models.AutoField(primary_key=True)
```

### Field types

Each field in your model should be an instance of the appropriate Field class. Django uses the field class types to determine a few things:

- The database column type (e.g. INTEGER, VARCHAR).
- The default HTML widget to use when rendering a form field (e.g. \<input type="text">, \<select>).
- The minimal validation requirements, used in Django’s admin and in automatically-generated forms.

See the complete list of Django's [built-in model field classes](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/models/fields/) or a [short summary](http://www.djangocheatsheet.info/2-models/4-fields/).

### Field options

Each field takes a certain set of field-specific arguments (documented in the model field reference). For example, `CharField` require a `max_length=` argument which specifies the size of the VARCHAR database field used to store the data.
There’s also a set of common arguments available to all field types. All are optional. Here’s a quick summary of the most often-used ones:

- `null=`  : If `True`, Django will store empty values as NULL in the database (default is `False`).
- `blank=` :  If `True`, the field is allowed to be blank (default is `False`).
	- Note that this is different than null. null is purely database-related, whereas blank is validation-related. If a field has `blank=True`, form validation will allow entry of an empty value. If a field has `blank=False`, the field will be required.
- `choices=` : An iterable (e.g., a list or tuple) of 2-tuples to use as choices for this field. If this is given, the default form
widget will be a select box instead of the standard text field and will limit choices to the choices given.
- `default=` : The default value for the field. This can be a value or a callable object.
- `help_text=` : Extra “help” text to be displayed with the form widget. It’s useful for documentation even if your field isn’t used on a form.
- `primary_key=` : If True, this field is the primary key for the model.
- `unique=` : If True, this field must be unique throughout the table.

## Relationships

The power of relational databases lies in relating tables to each other. Django offers ways to define the three most common types of database relationships: 

- **one-to-one** : (e.g. x=Address, y=Person)
	- x _belongs to_ **one** y
	- y _has_ **one** x
- **one-to-many** : (e.g. x=Person, y=Family)
	- x _belongs to_ **one** y
	- y _has_ **many** x 
- **many-to-many** : (e.g. x=Person, y=Group)
	- x _belongs to_ **many** y
	- y _has_ **many** x

### One-To-Many

To define a one-to-many relationship, use `django.db.models.ForeignKey` like any other `Field` type.

- `ForeignKey` requires a positional argument: the class to which the model is related.

```
from django.db import models

class Family(models.Model):
	# ...
	
class Person(models.Model):
	family = models.ForeignKey(Family)
	# ...
```
##### Reverse relationship

It is possible to specify the reverse model attribute with the `related_name` argument.  
By default, the [reverse model](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/models/relations/) uses the lowercased original model name, plus '_set'.  


e.g. Django will automatically add a `person_set` attribute to the `Family` class.

```
dupont = Family.objects.get(last_name="Dupont")
dupont.person_set # returns the related Person objects as QuerySet
```

### Many-To-Many

To define a many-to-many relationship, use `ManyToManyField` like any other `Field` type.

- `ManyToManyField` requires a positional argument: the class to which the model is related.

```
from django.db import models



class Person(models.Model):
	groups = models.ManyToManyField(Group)
	# ...

class Group(models.Model):
	# ...


# CREATE DATABASE INSTANCES	
ringo = Person.objects.create(name="Ringo Starr")
paul = Person.objects.create(name="Paul McCartney")
john = Person.objects.create(name="John Lenon")
beatles = Group.objects.create(name="The Beatles")

# CREATE RELATIONSHIPS
ringo.groups.add(beatles)
beatles.person_set = [john, paul, ringo, george]
paul.groups.create(name="Wings")
```

It doesn’t matter which model has the ManyToManyField, but you should only put it in one of the models – not both.

Generally, ManyToManyField instances should go in the object that’s going to be edited on a form. The way it’s set up above, the Person form would let users select the groups.

##### Reverse relationship

It is possible to specify the reverse model attribute with the `related_name` argument.  
By default [reverse model](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/models/relations/) uses the lowercased original model name, plus '_set' (just like reverse one-to-many relationships).  

e.g. Django will automatically add a `person_set` attribute to the `Group` class.

```
beatles = Group.objects.get(name="Beatles")
beatles.person_set # returns the related Person objects as QuerySet
```

##### Creating relationships
You’re ready to start creating some many-to-many relationships. You do this by creating instances of the intermediate model:

### One-To-One

To define a one-to-one relationship, use `OneToOneField` like any other
`Field` type.  
This is most useful on the primary key of an object **when that object “extends” another object in some way**.

- `OneToOneField` requires a positional argument: the class to which the model is related.

For example, if you were building a database of “places”, it would have fields like address, phone number, etc. Then, if you wanted to build a database of restaurants on top of the places, instead of repeating yourself and replicating those fields in the Restaurant model, you could make Restaurant have a OneToOneField to Place (because a restaurant “is a” place; in fact, to handle this you’d typically use inheritance, which involves an implicit one-to-one relation).

```
from django.db import models

class Place(models.Model):
	name = models.CharField(max_length=50)
	address = models.CharField(max_length=80)

class Restaurant(models.Model):
	place = models.OneToOneField(Place, primary_key=True)
	serves_hot_dogs = models.BooleanField(default=False)
	serves_pizza = models.BooleanField(default=False)
```
##### Reverse relationship

It is possible to specify the reverse model attribute with the `related_name` argument.
By default, the [reverse model](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/models/relations/) uses the lowercased original model name. A One-to-One reverse relation returns a single object, rather than a QuerySet.   


e.g. Django will automatically add a `restaurant` attribute to the `Place` class.

```
p = Place.objects.get(id=2)
p.restaurant # returns the related Restaurant object
```

### Queries over related object

Queries involving related objects follow the same rules as queries involving normal value fields. When specifying the value for a query to match, you may use either an object instance itself, or the primary key value for the object.

For example, if you have a `Group` object `beatles` with id=5, the following three queries would be identical:

```
Person.objects.filter(groups=beatles) # Query using object instance
Person.objects.filter(groups=beatles.id) # Query using id from instance
Person.objects.filter(groups=5) # Query using id directly

Group.objects.filter(members__name__startswith='Paul')
```

## Manager

### `objects` attribute

The most important attribute of a model is the `Manager`. It’s the interface through which database query operations are provided to Django models (SELECT, CREATE, UPDATE, DELETE).  
The Manager is used to **retrieve the instances from the database**. If no custom Manager is defined, the default attribute name is `objects`.

Note: Managers are **accessible only via model classes**, rather than from model instances, to enforce a separation between “table-level” operations and “record-level” operations.

```
ringo = Person.objects.create(name="Ringo Starr")

```

### Custom Manager

There are two reasons you might want to customize a Manager:
 
- to add extra Manager methods (table-level operations)
- to modify the initial QuerySet the Manager returns

## Model Methods

### Automatic Instance Methods

##### obj.save()


##### obj.delete()

##### obj.get\_FOO\_display()

For every field that has `choices` set, the object will have a ``get_FOO_display()`` method, where `FOO` is the name of the field. This method returns the “human-readable” value of the field.

##### obj.get\_next\_by\_FOO(kwargs) and obj.get\_previous\_by_FOO(kwargs)
For every `DateField` and `DateTimeField` that does not have null=True, the object will have `get_next_by_FOO()` and `get_previous_by_FOO()` methods, where `FOO` is the name of the field. This returns the next and previous object with respect to the date field


### Other Instance Methods

##### \_\_unicode\_\_() and \_\_str\_\_()

In Python 3, Django uses `str(obj)` (or the related function, `unicode(obj)`) to display an object. Thus, you should **always** return a nice, human-readable representation of the model from the \_\_str\_\_() method.

Note: If you define a `__unicode__()` method on your model and not a \_\_str\_\_() method, Django will automatically provide you with a \_\_str\_\_() that calls \_\_unicode\_\_() and then converts the result correctly. This is recommended development practice : **define only \_\_unicode\_\_() and let Django take care of the conversion**.

```
class Person(models.Model):
    first_name = models.CharField(max_length=50)
    last_name = models.CharField(max_length=50)

    def __unicode__(self):
        return u'%s %s' % (self.first_name, self.last_name)
```

##### get\_absolute_url() 
Define a `get_absolute_url()` method to tell Django how to calculate the canonical URL for an object. This method should appear to return a string that can be used to refer to the object over HTTP.

```
def get_absolute_url(self):
    return "/people/%i/" % self.id
```
```
<a href="{{ object.get_absolute_url }}">{{ object.name }}</a>
```

### Custom Methods

Define custom methods on a model to add custom **“row-level” functionality** to your objects. Whereas Manager
methods are intended to do “table-wide” things, model methods should act on a particular model instance.

```
from django.db import models

class Person(models.Model):
	first_name = models.CharField(max_length=50)
	last_name = models.CharField(max_length=50)
	birth_date = models.DateField()
	
	def baby_boomer_status(self):
		"Returns the person's baby-boomer status."
		import datetime
		if self.birth_date < datetime.date(1945, 8, 1):
			return "Pre-boomer"
		elif self.birth_date < datetime.date(1965, 1, 1):
			return "Baby boomer"
		else:
			return "Post-boomer"
	
	def _get_full_name(self):
		"Returns the person's full name."
		return '%s %s' % (self.first_name, self.last_name)
	
	full_name = property(_get_full_name)
```

### Common methods

`__str__()` : This is what Python and Django will use whenever a model instance needs to be displayed as a plain string. Most notably, this happens when you display an object in an interactive console or in the admin.  
You’ll always want to define this method; the default isn’t very helpful at all.

`get_absolute_url()` : This tells Django how to calculate the URL for an object. Django uses this in its admin interface, and any time it needs to figure out a URL for an object.  
Any object that has a URL that uniquely identifies it should define this method.

```
def get_absolute_url(self):
	return "/people/%i/" % self.id
```


## Making Queries

### Creating objects

To create and save an object in a single step: use the `.create()` class method.

```
from blog.models import Blog

Blog.create(name='Beatles Blog', tagline='All the latest Beatles news.')
```

To create an object in two steps (and perform operations in between): 

1. Instantiate the object using the model class and keyword arguments
2. Call `.save()` to save it to the database.

```
from blog.models import Blog

b = Blog(name='Beatles Blog', tagline='All the latest Beatles news.')
b.save()
```

### Saving changes to objects
To save changes to an object that’s already in the database: use `.save()` instance method.

### Retrieving objects
To retrieve objects from your database, construct a `QuerySet` via a `Manager` on your model class.

A `QuerySet` represents a collection of objects from your database. It can have zero, one or many filters. Filters narrow down the query results based on the given parameters. In SQL terms, a QuerySet equates to a SELECT statement, and a filter is a limiting clause such as WHERE or LIMIT.
