# Migrations

[Migrations](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/topics/migrations/) are how Django stores changes to your models (adding a field, deleting a model, etc.) and thus to your database schema - they’re just files on disk.

It is important to know when to **make migrations**, when to **run migrations**, and the common problems you might run into.

You should think of migrations as a **version control** system for your database schema. `makemigrations` is responsible for packaging up your model changes into individual migration files - analogous to commits - and `migrate` is responsible for applying those to your database.

# Make a migration
#### makemigrations
Use `makemigrations` to tell Django that changes have been made to the models of an app and that you’d like to **store the changes as a migration**.

Your models will be scanned and compared to the versions currently contained in your migration files, and then a new set of migrations will be written out. Make sure to read the output to see what makemigrations thinks you have changed - it’s not perfect, and for complex changes it might not be detecting what you expect.

```
python manage.py makemigrations <appname>
```

The migration file will be created in the `migrations/` folder of the concerned app.
#### sqlmigrate
Use `sqlmigrate` to **observe the SQL** statements that a migration would run.

```
python manage.py sqlmigrate <appname> <migrationname>
```

## Run a migration

#### migrate

Use `migrate` to **synchronize the changes on models (and migrations) with the database state**.

* No arguments: All migrated apps have all of their migrations run, and all unmigrated apps are synchronized with the database,
* `<appname>`: The specified app has its migrations run, up to the most recent migration. This may involve running other apps’ migrations too, due to dependencies.
* `<appname> <migrationname>`: Brings the database schema to a state where the named migration is applied, but no later migrations in the same app are applied. This may involve unapplying migrations if you have previously migrated past the named migration. Use the name zero to unapply all migrations for an app.

```
python manage.py migrate [<appname>] [<migrationname>]
```

#### Initial migration

Once a project is created, it is important to run a initial migration in order to setup the database for a Django project.

```
python manage.py migrate
```
This will create a few tables for the default `INSTALLED_APPS`, for instance:

- django\_content_type
- django_migrations
- django_session
- django_site

## Squash migrations

Use `squashmigrations` to **reduce a set of many migrations down to one** (or sometimes a few) migrations which still represent the same changes.

```
python manage.py squashmigrations [<appname>] [<migrationname>]
```

NB: migration code is optimized to deal with hundreds at a time without much slowdown. However, eventually you will want to move back from having several hundred migrations to just a few, and that’s where squashing comes in.

Django does this by taking all of your existing migrations, extracting their Operations and putting them all in sequence, and then running an optimizer over them to try and reduce the length of the list - for example, it knows that CreateModel and DeleteModel cancel each other out, and it knows that AddField can be rolled into CreateModel.


## Migrations Possible Issues

Check the [complete reference](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/topics/migrations/#backend-support) for possible issues with migrations, including :

- Backend Support (PostgreSQL, MySQL, SQLite)
- Dependencies
- Adding migrations to an existing app
- Historical models
- Removing model fields
- Data Migrations