# Django Template Language


A template is simply a text file. It can generate any text-based format (HTML, XML, CSV, etc.).

A template contains **variables**, which get replaced with values when the template is evaluated, and **tags**, which control the logic of the template.

Here is a minimal template that illustrates a few basics :

```
{% extends "base_generic.html" %}

{% block title %}{{ section.title }}{% endblock %}

{% block content %}
<h1>{{ section.title }}</h1>

{% for story in story_list %}
<h2>
  <a href="{{ story.get_absolute_url }}">
    {{ story.headline|upper }}
  </a>
</h2>
<p>{{ story.tease|truncatewords:"100" }}</p>
{% endfor %}
{% endblock %}
```

## Variables

Use *Variables* to **replace placeholders with values when the template is evaluated**.

Variables look like this: `{{ <variablename> }}`

e.g. `{{ section.title }}` will be replaced with the `title` attribute of the `section` object.

NB: By default, variables have **automatic HTML escaping** (e.g. `{{ <b> }}` will be escaped `&lt;b&gt;`).

## Filters

Use *Filters* to **modify variables for display**. Use a pipe `|` to apply a filter.

Filters look like this: `{{ <variablename>|<filter> }}`.
e.g. `{{ bio|truncatewords:30 }}` will display the first 30 words of the `bio` variable.

Here are some of Django's [60 built-in filters](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/templates/builtins/#ref-templates-builtins-filters) :

- `{{ value|add:"2" }}` : Adds the argument to the value.
- `{{ value|cut:" " }}` : Removes all values of arg from the given string.
- `{{ value|join:", " }}` : Joins a list with a string, like Python’s str.join(list)
- `{{ value|slice:":2" }}` : Returns a slice of the list.
- `{{ value|first }}` : Returns the first item in a list.
- `{{ value|last }}` : Returns the last item in a list.
- `{{ value|date:"D d M Y" }}` : Formats a date according to the given format.
- `{{ value|time:"H:i" }}` : Formats a time according to the given format.
- `{{ from_date|timesince:to_date }}` : Formats a to\_date (default is now) as the time since the from_date.
- `{{ to_date|timeuntil:from_date }}` : Formats a from\_date (default is now) as the time until the to_date.
- `{{ value|default:"nothing" }}` : If value evaluates to False, uses the given default. Otherwise, uses the value.
- `{{ value|default_if_none:"nothing" }}` : If value is None, uses the given default. Otherwise, uses the value.
- `{{ value|dictsort:"name" }}` : Takes a list of dictionaries and returns that list sorted by the key given in the argument.
- `{{ value|length }}` : Returns the length of the value. This works for both strings and lists.
- `{{ value|truncatewords:2 }}` : Truncates a string after a certain number of words and append with "...".
- `message{{ num_messages|pluralize }}` : Returns a plural suffix if the value is not 1. By default, this suffix is 's'.
- `{{ value|random }}` : Returns a random item from the given list.
- `{{ value|slugify }}` : Converts to slug.
- `{{ value|yesno:"yeah,no,maybe" }}` : Maps values for True, False, and (optionally) None, to a custom mapping.
- `{{ value|pprint }}` : A wrapper around `pprint.pprint()` – for debugging, really.

## Comments

Use the comment syntax to **comment-out part of a line** in a template.

One-line comments look like this: `{# <commented_text> #}`  
Multi-line comments look like this: `{% comment <commented_text> %}`

## Tags

Use *Tags* to **control the logic of the template**. Some _create text_ in the output, some _control flow_ by performing loops or logic, and some _load external information_ into the template to be used by later variables.

One-line tags look like this: `{% <tag> %}`.  
Multi-line tags look like this: `{% <tag> %}instruction block{% <endtag> %}`.

### for

Use `{% for <element> in <sequence> %}` to **loop over each item in an array**.

```
<ul>
{% for athlete in athlete_list %}
    <li>{{ athlete.name }}</li>
{% endfor %}
</ul>
```

The for tag can take an optional `{% empty %}` clause whose text is displayed if the given array is empty or could not be found.

### if, elif and else

Use `{% if <variable> %}` to **evaluates a variable**.  
If that variable is “true” the contents of the block are displayed.

```
{% if athlete_list %}
    Number of athletes: {{ athlete_list|length }}
{% elif athlete_in_locker_room_list %}
    Athletes should be out of the locker room soon!
{% else %}
    No athletes.
{% endif %}
```

**if** tags may use `and`, `or` or `not` to test a number of variables or to negate a given variable.  
**if** tags may use the operators `==`, `!=`, `<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=` and `in`.  
**if** tags may use filters to preprocess the tested variables.

### block and extend

See *Template Inheritance*.

Use the `{% extends <templatename> %}` tag to **“extends” a parent template**.

Use the `{% block <blockname> %}` tag to **name chunks of the template that child templates can override**.

### Other built-in tags

Here are some of Django's [built-in tags reference](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/templates/builtins/#built-in-tag-reference) :

- `{% csrf_token %}` : Used for [CSRF](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/csrf/) protection
- `{% cycle 'row1' 'row2' %}` : Cycles through its arguments each time the tag is encountered.
- `{% debug %}` : Outputs debugging information, including the current context and imported modules.
- `{% filter <filtername> %}` Filters the contents of the block through one or more filters
- `{% firstof var1 var2 var3 "fallback value" %}` : Outputs the first argument variable that is not False.
- `{% ifchanged value %}` : Checks if a value has changed from the last iteration of a loop.
- `{% include "foo/bar.html" %}` or `{% include template_name %}` : Loads a template and renders it with the current context
- `{% lorem [count] [method] [random] %}` : Displays random “lorem ipsum” Latin text.
- `{% now "jS F Y H:i" %}` : Displays the current date and/or time using the given format. 
- `{% regroup <list> by <attribute> as <new_list> %}` : Regroups a list of alike objects by a common attribute (= GroupBy).
- `{% with <new_var_name>=<long_var_name> %}` : Caches a complex variable under a simpler name.

## Template Inheritance

*Template inheritance* allows you to **build a _base template_** that contains all the common elements of your site and **define _blocks_ that child templates can override**.

##### Base template + blocks (base.html)
```
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
<head>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" />
    <title>{% block title %}My amazing site{% endblock %}</title>
</head>

<body>
    <div id="sidebar">
        {% block sidebar %}
        <ul>
            <li><a href="/">Home</a></li>
            <li><a href="/blog/">Blog</a></li>
        </ul>
        {% endblock %}
    </div>

    <div id="content">
        {% block content %}{% endblock %}
    </div>
</body>
</html>
```

##### Child template + override blocks

```
{% extends "base.html" %}

{% block title %}My amazing blog{% endblock %}

{% block content %}
{% for entry in blog_entries %}
    <h2>{{ entry.title }}</h2>
    <p>{{ entry.body }}</p>
{% endfor %}
{% endblock %}
```

### Common approach
One way to maximize code reuse and make it easy to add items to shared content areas, such as section-wide navigation, is the following three-level approach :

1. Create a `base.html` template that holds the main look-and-feel of your site.
2. Create a `base_SECTIONNAME.html` template for each “section” of your site. 
	- For example, `base_news.html`, `base_sports.html`. These templates all extend base.html and include section-specific styles/design.
3. Create individual templates for each type of page, such as a news article or blog entry. These templates extend the appropriate section template.

### Tips on inheritance

- If you use `{% extends %}` in a template, it must be the first template tag in that template. Template inheritance won’t work, otherwise.

- More `{% block %}` tags in your base templates are better. Remember, child templates don’t have to define all parent blocks.

- If you find yourself duplicating content in a number of templates, it probably means you should move that content to a `{% block %}` in a parent template.

- If you need to get the content of the block from the parent template, the `{{ block.super }}` variable will do the trick. This is useful if you want to add to the contents of a parent block instead of completely overriding it.

- For extra readability, you can optionally give a name to your `{% endblock <blockname> %}` tag.


