# Template API

https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/templates/api/

### Overview

Using the template system in Python is a three-step process:

1. Configure **Engine**.
2. Load a **Template**.
3. Render the template with a **Context**.


## Configure Engine

Use the `TEMPLATES=` setting to configure Templates engine. It’s a list of engine configurations, _one for each engine_. Each engine configuration is a dict of options.

- `'BACKEND'` is a dotted Python path to a template engine class.
- `'DIRS'` defines a list of directories where the engine should look for template source files, in search order.
- `'APP_DIRS'` tells whether the engine should look for templates inside installed applications.
- `'OPTIONS'` contains backend-specific settings.

```
TEMPLATES = [
    {
        'BACKEND': 'django.template.backends.django.DjangoTemplates',
        'DIRS': [
            '/home/html/example.com',
            '/home/html/default',
        ],
        'APP_DIRS': True,
    },
    {
        'BACKEND': 'django.template.backends.jinja2.Jinja2',
        'DIRS': [
            '/home/html/jinja2',
        ],
    },
]
```

**When Django finds a template that exists, it stops looking.**

## Load Template

Calling the Engine's factory methods `get_template()`, `select_template()` to _create a Template object_.

- `get_template(template_name)` : loads the template with the given name and returns a Template object.
- `select_template(list_of_template_names)` : tries each name in order and returns the first template that exists.

Specifying template directories to search in by using the `'DIRS'` option in the `TEMPLATES` setting.  
Generally, you’ll store templates in files on your filesystem rather than using the low-level Template API yourself. Save templates in a directory specified as a template directory.

In the example above, here’s what Django will look for if you call `select_template(['story_253_detail.html', 'news/story_detail.html'])`:

1. `/home/html/example.com/story_253_detail.html` ('django' engine)
- `/home/html/default/story_253_detail.html` ('django' engine)
- `/home/html/jinja2/story_253_detail.html` ('jinja2' engine)
- `/home/html/example.com/news/story_detail.html` ('django' engine)
- `/home/html/default/news/story_detail.html` ('django' engine)
- `/home/html/jinja2/news/story_detail.html` ('jinja2' engine)

## Render Template with Context

Once you have a compiled Template object, you can render a context with it. 

NB: You can reuse the same template to render it several times with different contexts.

Call the Template object’s method `.render()` **with a Context** to _“fill” the template_:

```
from django.template import Context, Template
template = Template("My name is {{ my_name }}.")

context = Context({"my_name": "Adrian"})
template.render(context)
"My name is Adrian."

context = Context({"my_name": "Dolores"})
template.render(context)
"My name is Dolores."
```

