# Building a Form

https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/topics/forms/
http://pythoncentral.io/how-to-use-python-django-forms/

- Django Form class
- Quick Example
- Form Fields
- Automatic Instance Attributes and Methods

## Django Form class

A **Django Form** class is the source of data that _describes a web form_. It contains the essential **fields** and **looks** of the form you’re using. Generally, each Form class maps to a HTML \<form>.  

NB: It works similar to the way a Model contains the essential **fields** and **behaviors** of the data you’re storing.

#### Basic Concepts

Before we dive into the details about writing a form, we need to know the following concepts:

- Form: A collection of fields.
- Field: A Python class that validates the data (e.g. a CharField that limits the number of maximum characters).
- Widget: A Python class that renders itself into an HTML form.
- Form Assets: CSS and Javascript associated with rendering a form.

#### The basics:

- All forms are Python class that subclasses django.forms.Form
- Each Form class represents a HTML \<form>
- Each attribute of the Form class represents a form element (HTML \<input>, \<select>, etc.)

A Form field is represented to a user in the browser as an HTML “widget” (a piece of user interface machinery). Each field type has an appropriate default Widget class, but these can be overridden as required.

#### The rendering:

1. Instantiate the form in the view
2. Pre-populate the form (if need be) with :
	- data from a saved model instance
	- data received from a previous HTML form submission 
	- data that we have collated from other sources
3. Pass it to the template context
4. Expand the template variable to HTML markup with DTL

## Quick Example

Suppose you want to create a simple form on your Web site, in order to obtain the user’s name.

#### The Form class
```
from django import forms

class NameForm(forms.Form):
    your_name = forms.CharField(label='Your name', max_length=100)
```

#### The Form HTML output

An instance of the above NameForm class would create an HTML form like this:

```
<label for="your_name">Your name: </label>
<input id="your_name" type="text" name="your_name" maxlength="100">
```

Note that it **does not** include the \<form> tags, or a submit button. We’ll have to provide those ourselves in the template.

#### The Form Template

We don’t need to do much in our name.html template. The simplest example is:

```
<form action="/your-name/" method="post">{% csrf_token %}
    {{ form }}
    <input type="submit" value="Submit" />
</form>
```

All the form’s fields and their attributes will be unpacked into HTML output from that `{{ form }}` by Django’s template language.

## Form Fields

When you create a Form class, the most important part is defining the fields of the form. Each field has custom validation logic, along with a few other hooks.

### Field types

Each field in your Form should be an instance of the appropriate Field class.  
Django uses the field class types to determine a few things:

- the Python data type (e.g. True, False, int, float, string, etc.)
- the validation requirements.
- the default HTML widget to use when rendering the form field (e.g. \<input type="text">, \<select>).

See the complete list of Django's [built-in form field classes](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/forms/fields/#built-in-field-classes) or a [short summary](http://www.djangocheatsheet.info/15-forms/17-fields/). Here's a list of [default form field for a model field](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/topics/forms/modelforms/#field-types).

### Field widgets

A widget is Django’s **representation of an HTML input element**.  
The widget handles :

- the rendering of the HTML.
- the extraction of data from a GET/POST dictionary that corresponds to the widget.

Django ships with dozens of built-in widget types; you can find the complete list in the [built-in widgets field](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/forms/widgets/#built-in-widgets) or a [short summary](http://www.djangocheatsheet.info/15-forms/18-widgets/).

Whenever you specify a field on a form, Django will use a default widget that is appropriate to the type of data that is to be displayed.  
If you want to use a different widget for a field, you can just use the widget argument on the field definition. For example:

```
from django import forms

class CommentForm(forms.Form):
    name = forms.CharField()
    url = forms.URLField()
    comment = forms.CharField(widget=forms.Textarea)
```    

## Automatic Instance Attributes and Methods

https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/forms/api/

#### .is_valid()

Use the `.is_valid()` method to _run validation routines for all its fields_. When this method is called, if all fields contain valid data, it will:

1. Return `True`
2. Place the validated form data in the `.cleaned_data` attribute.

#### .cleaned_data

Use the `.cleaned_data` attribute to _access the dictionnary of validated form data_. Note that this data is already converted into Python types using the field types.

#### .is_bound

Use the `.is_bound` attribute to _distinguish between bound and unbound form instances_ at runtime.

```
f = ContactForm()
f.is_bound  # False

f = ContactForm({'subject': 'hello'})
f.is_bound  # True
```

#### .has_changed()

Use the `.has_changed()` method to _check if the form data has been changed from the initial data_.

When a form is submitted, we reconstruct it and provide the original data so that the comparison can be done :

```
data = {'subject': 'hello',
		 'message': 'Hi there',
		 'sender': 'foo@example.com',
		 'cc_myself': True}
f = ContactForm(request.POST, initial=data)
f.has_changed()  # True (if the data differs)
```

